Top 10 Most Famous Thought Experiments
10.
The Trolley Problem
One of the most well known thought experiments
in the field of ethics is the “Trolley Problem,”
which goes something like this: a madman has
tied five innocent people to a trolley track.
An out of control trolley car is careening
toward them, and is moments away from running
them over.
Luckily, you can pull a lever and divert the
trolley to another track.
The only problem is that the madman has also
tied a single person to that track.
Considering the circumstances, should you
pull the lever?
What it Means:
The trolley problem was first proposed by
the philosopher Philippa Foot as a means of
critiquing the major theories in ethical philosophy,
in particular utilitarianism, the system which
proposes that the most moral decision is always
the one that provides “the greatest good
for the greatest number.”
From a utilitarian point of view, the obvious
choice is to pull the lever, saving five and
only killing one.
But critics of this theory would state that
in pulling the lever you become complicit
in what is clearly an immoral act—you are
now partially responsible for the death of
the lone person on the other track.
Others, meanwhile, argue that your mere presence
in the situation demands that you act, and
that to do nothing would be equally immoral.
In short, there is no wholly moral action,
and this is the point.
Many philosophers have used the trolley problem
as an example of the ways that real world
situations often force individuals to compromise
their own moral codes, and that there are
times when there is no totally moral course
of action.
9.
The Cow in the Field
One of the major thought experiments in epistemology
(the field of philosophy that deals with knowledge)
is what is known as “The Cow in the Field.”
It concerns a farmer who is worried his prize
cow has wandered off.
When the milkman comes to the farm, he tells
the farmer not to worry, because he’s seen
that the cow is in a nearby field.
Though he’s nearly sure the man is right,
the farmer takes a look for himself, sees
the familiar black and white shape of his
cow, and is satisfied that he knows the cow
is there.
Later on, the milkman drops by the field to
double-check.
The cow is indeed there, but it’s hidden
in a grove of trees.
There is also a large sheet of black and white
paper caught in a tree, and it is obvious
that the farmer mistook it for his cow.
The question, then: even though the cow was
in the field, was the farmer correct when
he said he knew it was there?
What it Means:
The Cow in the Field was first used by Edmund
Gettier as a criticism of the popular definition
of knowledge as “justified true belief”—that
is, that something becomes knowledge when
a person believes it; it is factually true;
and they have a verifiable justification for
their belief.
In the experiment, the farmer’s belief that
the cow was there was justified by the testimony
of the milkman and his own verification of
a black and white object sitting in the field.
It also happened to be true, as the milkman
later confirmed.
But despite all this, the farmer did not truly
know the cow was there, because his reasoning
for believing it turned out to be based on
false premises.
Gettier used this experiment, along with a
few other examples, as proof of his argument
that the definition of knowledge as justified
true belief needed to be amended.
8.
The Ticking Time Bomb
If you’ve paid any attention to political
discourse over the past few years—or ever
seen an action movie, for that matter—then
you are no doubt familiar with the “ticking
time bomb” thought experiment.
It asks you to imagine that a bomb or other
weapon of mass destruction is hidden in your
city, and the timer on it will soon strike
zero.
You have in your custody a man with knowledge
of where the device is planted.
Do you resort to torture in order to get him
to give up the information?
What it Means:
Like the trolley problem, the ticking time
bomb scenario is an ethical problem that forces
one to choose between two morally questionable
acts.
It is most often employed as a counter argument
to those who say the use of torture is inexcusable
under any circumstances.
It’s also used as an example of the way
laws—like those the U.S. has against torturing
prisoners—will always be set aside given
extreme circumstances.
Thanks to its fictionalized use in television
shows like 24, along with its constant position
in political debates, the ticking time bomb
scenario has become one of the most frequently
repeated thought experiments.
An even more extreme take on the problem was
presented in a British news article earlier
this year.
That version proposes that the terrorist in
question won’t respond to torture, and asks
if one would be willing to resort to torturing
the man’s wife and children as a means of
extracting the information from him.
7.
Einstein’s Light Beam
It’s a little known fact that Albert Einstein’s
famous work on special relativity was spurred
by a thought experiment he conducted when
he was only 16 years old.
In his book Autobiographical Notes, Einstein
recalls how he once daydreamed about chasing
a beam of light as it traveled through space.
He reasoned that if he were able to move next
to it at the speed of light, he should be
able to observe the light frozen in space
as “an electromagnetic field at rest though
spatially oscillating.”
For Einstein, this thought experiment proved
that for his imaginary observer “everything
would have to happen according to the same
laws as for an observer who, relative to the
Earth, was at rest.”
What it Means:
In truth, no one really knows for sure.
Scientists have long debated how this deceivingly
simple thought experiment helped Einstein
make the massive theoretical leap required
to arrive at special relativity theory.
At the time, the ideas in the experiment contradicted
the now-debunked belief in the “aether,”
an invisible field through which light was
believed to travel.
It would be years before he could prove he
was right, but this thought experiment was
somehow the “germ,” as he called it, for
Einstein’s theory of special relativity,
one of the ideas that first established him
as a towering figure in theoretical physics.
6.
The Ship of Theseus
One of the oldest of all thought experiments
is the paradox known as the Ship of Theseus,
which originated in the writings of Plutarch.
It describes a ship that remained seaworthy
for hundreds of years thanks to constant repairs
and replacement parts.
As soon as one plank became old and rotted,
it would be replaced, and so on until every
working part of the ship was no longer original
to it.
The question is whether this end product is
still the same Ship of Theseus, or something
completely new and different.
If it’s not, at what point did it stop being
the same ship?
The Philosopher Thomas Hobbes would later
take the problem even further: if one were
to take all the old parts removed from the
Ship of Theseus and build a new ship from
them, then which of the two vessels is the
real Ship of Theseus?
What it Means:
For philosophers, the story of the Ship of
Theseus is used as a means of exploring the
nature of identity, specifically the question
of whether objects are more than just the
sum of their parts.
A more modern example would be a band that
had evolved over the years to the point that
few or no original members remained in the
lineup.
This notion is also applicable to everything
from businesses, which might retain the same
name despite mergers and changes in leadership,
to the human body, which is constantly regenerating
and rebuilding itself.
At its heart, the experiment forces one to
question the commonly held idea that identity
is solely contained in physical objects and
phenomena.
5.
Galileo’s Gravity Experiment
One of the earliest thought experiments originated
with the physicist and astronomer Galileo.
In order to refute Aristotle’s claim that
the speed of a falling object is dictated
by its mass, Galileo devised a simple mental
example: According to Aristotelian logic,
if a light object and a heavy object were
tied together and dropped off a tower, then
the heavier object would fall faster, and
the rope between the two would become taut.
This would allow the lighter object to create
drag and slow the heavy one down.
But Galileo reasoned that once this occurs,
the weight of the two objects together should
be heavier than the weight of either one by
itself, therefore making the system as a whole
fall faster.
That this is a contradiction proved that Aristotle’s
hypothesis was wrong.
What it Means:
One of the most famous stories about Galileo
is that he once dropped two metal balls off
the Leaning Tower of Pisa to prove that heavier
objects do not fall faster than lighter ones.
In actuality, this story is probably just
a legend; instead, it was this elegant thought
experiment that helped prove a very important
theory about gravity: no matter their mass,
all objects fall at the same rate of speed.
4.
Monkeys and Typewriters
Another thought experiment that gets a lot
of play in popular culture is what is known
as the “infinite monkey theorem.”
Also known as the “monkeys and typewriters”
experiment, the theorem states that if an
infinite number of monkeys were allowed to
randomly hit keys on an infinite number of
typewriters for an infinite amount of time,
then at some point they would “almost surely”
produce the complete works of Shakespeare.
The monkeys and typewriters idea was popularized
in the early 20th century by the French mathematician
Emile Borel, but its basic idea—that infinite
agents and infinite time will randomly produce
anything and everything—dates back to Aristotle.
What it Means:
Simply put, the “monkeys and typewriters”
theorem is one of the best ways to illustrate
the nature of infinity.
The human mind has a difficult time imagining
a universe with no end or time that will never
cease, and the infinite monkeys help to illustrate
the sheer breadth of possibilities these concepts
create.
The idea that a monkey could write Hamlet
by accident seems counterintuitive, but in
fact it is mathematically provable when one
considers the probabilities.
The theorem itself is impossible to recreate
in the real world, but that hasn’t stopped
some from trying: In 2003, science students
at a zoo in the U.K. “tested” the infinite
monkey theorem when they put a computer and
a keyboard in a primate enclosure.
Unfortunately, the monkeys never got around
to composing any sonnets.
According to researchers, all they managed
to produce was five pages consisting almost
entirely of the letter “s.”
3.
The Chinese Room
The Chinese Room is a famous thought experiment
first proposed in the early 1980s by John
Searle, a prominent American philosopher.
The experiment asks you to imagine that an
English speaking man has been placed in a
room that is entirely sealed, save for a small
mail slot in the chamber door.
He has with him a hard copy in English of
a computer program that translates the Chinese
language.
He also has plenty of spare scratch paper,
pencils, and file cabinets.
Pieces of paper containing Chinese characters
are then slipped through the slot in the door.
According to Searle, the man should be able
to use his book to translate them and then
send back his own response in Chinese.
Although he doesn’t speak a word of the
language, Searle argues that through this
process the man in the room could convince
anyone on the outside that he was a fluent
speaker of Chinese.
What it Means:
Searle conceived the Chinese Room thought
experiment in order to refute the argument
that computers and other artificial intelligences
could actually think and understand.
The man in the room does not speak Chinese;
he can’t think in the language.
But because he has certain tools at his disposal,
he would be able convince even a native speaker
that he was fluent in it.
According to Searle, computers do the same
thing.
They don’t ever truly understand the information
they’re given, but they can run a program,
access information, and give a clear impression
of human intelligence.
2.
Schrodinger’s Cat
Schrödinger’s Cat is a paradox relating
to quantum mechanics that was first proposed
by the physicist Erwin Schrödinger.
It concerns a cat that is sealed inside a
box for one hour along with a radioactive
element and a vial of deadly poison.
There is a 50/50 chance that the radioactive
element will decay over the course of the
hour.
If it does, then a hammer connected to a Geiger
counter will trigger, break the vial, release
the poison, and kill the cat.
Since there is an equal chance that this will
or will not happen, Schrödinger argued that
before the box is opened the cat is simultaneously
both alive and dead.
What it Means:
In short, the point of the experiment is that
because there is no one around to1 witness
what had occurred, the cat existed in all
of its possible states (in this case either
alive or dead) simultaneously.
This notion is similar to the old “if a
tree falls in the woods and there’s no one
there to hear it, does it make a sound?”
riddle.
Schrödinger originally conceived of his theoretical
cat in response to an article that discussed
the nature of quantum superpositions, a theory
that defines all the possible states in which
an object can exist.
Schrödinger’s Cat also helped to illustrate
just how weird the rules of quantum mechanics
really were.
The thought experiment is notorious for its
complexity, which has encouraged a wide variety
of interpretations.
One of the most bizarre is the “many worlds”
hypothesis, which states that the cat is both
alive and dead, and that both cats exist in
different universes that will never overlap
with one another.
1.
Brain in a Vat
There has been no more influential thought
experiment than the so-called “brain in
a vat” hypothesis, which has permeated everything
from cognitive science and philosophy to popular
culture.
The experiment asks you to imagine a mad scientist
has taken your brain from your body and placed
it in a vat of some kind of life sustaining
fluid.
Electrodes have been connected to your brain,
and these are connected to a computer that
generates images and sensations.
Since all your information about the world
is filtered through the brain, this computer
would have the ability to simulate your everyday
experience.
If this were indeed possible, how could you
ever truly prove that the world around you
was real, and not just a simulation generated
by a computer?
What it Means:
If you’re thinking this all sounds a bit
like The Matrix, you’re right.
That film, along with several other sci-fi
stories and movies, was heavily influenced
by the brain in a vat thought experiment.
At its heart, the exercise asks you to question
the nature of experience, and to consider
what it really means to be human.
The idea for the experiment, which was popularized
by Hilary Putnam, dates all the way back to
the 17th century philosopher Rene Descartes.
In his Meditations on the First Philosophy,
Descartes questioned whether he could ever
truly prove that all his sensations were really
his own, and not just an illusion caused by
an “evil daemon.”
Descartes accounted for this problem with
his classic maxim “cogito ergo sum” (“I
think therefore I am”).
Unfortunately, the brain in a vat experiment
complicates this argument, too, since a brain
connected to electrodes could still think.
The brain in a vat experiment has been widely
discussed among philosophers, and many objections
have been raised over its premise, but there
is still no good rebuttal to its central question:
how do you ever truly know what
is real?